---
layout: page
title: Birds of a Feather
description:
menubar: program
permalink: program/bofs/
menubar_toc: true
set_last_modified: true
---

## AI in Practice - Managing Research Projects Incorporating Artificial Intelligence

_David Pettifor, Daniel Madren, and Kenton McHenry_

The substantial shift in the technological landscape that
Artificial Intelligence has brought to the research
community is felt across the board. It seems like
everywhere we turn, AI has infiltrated conversations,
opinions, and expectations. To some, it may be a simple
buzzword and expect the fad to fade. Others may see it as a
secret sauce to “just make my project better.” How do we,
as RSEs and leaders in tech, approach AI with
responsibility and effectively communicate its value-add to
research? Beyond that, might this be game changing for
RSEs, who are often underfunded on grants so as to be more
competitive, yet committed to deliverables larger in scope
than their time commitment.  How might RSE leverage such
tools safely? Join us as we share our perspectives and
recent experiences with integrating AI into a variety of
research projects.

------


## Accelerating Research: Strategies from the Field

_Jen Rosiere Reynolds, Lance Parsons, Gail Rosenbaum, Jason
Simms, and Sarah Stevens_

Accelerating Research: Strategies from the Field is a Birds
of a Feather (BoF) session aimed at exploring how research
software engineering (RSE) and computational tools are
being utilized to enhance research capacity and impact
across various institutions and disciplines. This session
will feature a diverse panel of individuals and
organizations actively engaged in building and supporting
the systems that facilitate computational research. The
session will begin with panelists sharing their strategies,
operational models, and the impacts of their work.
Following the panel, the session will transition to an
interactive format, inviting audience members to
participate in a structured discussion. This session is
geared towards practicing RSEs, researchers who utilize or
depend on computational methods, institutional leaders
looking to enhance their RSE efforts, and community
builders interested in supporting such collaboration. By
showcasing real-world examples and encouraging collective
problem-solving, this BoF aims to inspire practical next
steps, deepen connections among attendees, and contribute
to a more interconnected, effective, and sustainable
research environment.

------


## Better Scientific Software Fellowship Community

_Elsa Gonsiorowski, Adam Lavely, and Mary Ann Leung_

Software developers face increasing complexity in
computational models, computer architectures, and emerging
workflows. In this environment Research Software Engineers
need to continually improve software practices and
constantly hone their craft. To address this need, the
Better Scientific Software (BSSw) Fellowship Program
launched in 2018 to seed a community of like-minded
individuals interested in improving all aspects of the work
of software development. The BSSw Birds of a Feather
session brings together alumni, honorable mentions, current
fellows, BSSw leadership and potential applicants to
discuss software best practices and the upcoming 2026
Fellowship requirements and deadlines.

------


## Sustainable Models of RSE Support: The Prospects of Centralization in Institutional Research

_Eric Manning, Lori Bougher, Colin Swaney, and Sangyoon Park_

Research Software Engineers (RSEs) remain relatively new to
the social sciences. With little precedent, how do you
build an effective and sustainable model of RSE support?

We present a model of centralized support over more
traditional siloing of RSEs in research labs.
Centralization can offer greater stability in funding and
demand in an uncertain climate, but forces a choice of
versatility over depth in domain expertise.

Working with a lean team means clearly defining an RSE’s
role, from broad strategy to project-specific deliverables.
In the social sciences, models tend to fail when
responsibilities are ill-defined—for example, when RSEs
assume postdoc roles, centers replicate existing
generalized services, or mission creep leads to indefinite
support. In this model, RSEs generally do not take a
co-authorship role or assist in the development of research
questions or statistical methods.

We describe our workflow for managing projects under this
model. While social scientists are generally experienced
collaborators with deep technical expertise,
outreach—explaining how RSEs can innovate and accelerate
social science research–is a key challenge. Our adopted
strategies include a discovery phase for consultations,
department- and lab-specific outreach, and a consistent
program of educational workshops.

Centralization enhances public good creation by expertly
reconciling shared needs across departments and projects.
We present two success stories: a
machine-learning-as-a-service tool that offers a no-cost,
private, replicable alternative to cloud services; and the
emergence of a new role, Research Data Engineer, where we
reintroduce a more active research component with technical
concentration on the data engineering pipeline.

------
